NYT Reporting on Palestine

Israeli Forces Kill Two Palestinians After They Appear to Surrender, Video Shows
The Israeli authorities said they were investigating the shooting, which came amid days of extensive military operations in the West Bank.


Listen to this article · 4:24 min Learn more
Share full article


Video
Video Shows Israeli Forces Killing Militants Who Appeared to Surrender

1:47
Israeli security forces on Thursday killed two militants in the West Bank after they appeared to surrender, according to footage of the episode. The Israeli authorities said they were investigating.CreditCredit...Palestine TV, via Associated Press
By Adam RasgonSanjana Varghese and Fatima AbdulKarim
Adam Rasgon reported from Tel Aviv, and Fatima AbdulKarim from Ramallah in the West Bank.

Nov. 28, 2025
Israeli security forces shot dead two Palestinians in the West Bank on Thursday after they appeared to surrender, according to videos released by an international news agency and two Arab television networks.

The Israeli authorities said in a statement that they were examining the shooting and that the two men were involved in militant activity. Palestinian officials condemned the killings as a “field execution.”

The shooting came amid days of extensive Israeli military operations and raids in the Israeli-occupied northern West Bank. It prompted fresh accusations from Palestinian officials that Israel was using excessive force there.

ImagePeople in tactical gear hold guns near a damaged garage door, one crouches. An armored vehicle and a green car are in the foreground.
Footage released by Palestine TV showing the moment the Palestinian men were shot.Credit...Palestine TV, via Reuters
Footage showed two men emerging from a garage in Jenin, who then lift their shirts, seeming to indicate they are carrying no weapons, and raise their hands. They are seen kneeling, while Israeli security forces point their weapons at them.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
The Israeli forces kick the men, who shuffle back toward the garage. Moments later, gunshots are fired and, shortly after, the body of one of the men can be seen slumped on the ground. In one of the clips reviewed, Israeli forces can be seen continuing to shoot into the garage.

Subscribe to The Times to read as many articles as you like.

Adam Rasgon is a reporter for The Times in Jerusalem, covering Israeli and Palestinian affairs.

Sanjana Varghese is a reporter on The Times’s Visual Investigations team, specializing in the use of advanced digital techniques to analyze visual evidence.

A version of this article appears in print on Nov. 29, 2025, Section A, Page 9 of the New York edition with the headline: In Video, 2 Men Are Killed By Israelis After Surrender. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
See more on: The Palestinian Authority
Share full article

Skip to contentSkip to site index
You have a preview view of this article while we are checking your access. When we have confirmed access, the full article content will load.
Opinion
Guest Essay
This Is the
Story of How the
Democrats
Blew It on Gaza

Illustration by The New York Times
Guest Essay

Less than two weeks after the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, President Joe Biden traveled to Israel and held Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in an embrace. The image captured the solidarity Americans felt with Israelis after they suffered such horrific violence. It also symbolized a political and governing reflex within the Democratic Party.

During the Biden presidency, it was short-handed the “hug Bibi” strategy — the idea that smothering Mr. Netanyahu with unconditional support would give the U.S. leverage to influence his actions. Over the final 15 months of the Biden presidency, this approach led the White House to provide a flood of weapons for Israel’s bombardment of Palestinians, veto United Nations Security Council resolutions calling for a cease-fire, attack the International Criminal Court for pursuing charges against Mr. Netanyahu, ignore its own policies about supporting military units credibly accused of war crimes and blame Hamas for not accepting cease-fire terms that the Israeli government was also rejecting.

This approach made Democrats hypocrites when defending a “rules-based order,” racial equality and democracy. It alienated elements of their base and placed them out of step with younger voters. And in an age of authoritarianism, fealty to an Israeli strongman who routinely humiliated them made Democrats appear weak: Mr. Netanyahu was hugged all the way into the arms of Donald Trump.

Image
President Joe Biden smothered Benjamin Netanyahu with support, thinking it would give it influence over his actions.Credit...Evan Vucci/Associated Press
Today, with a tenuous cease-fire, it may be tempting for the party to memory hole what has happened in Gaza. After all, Democrats just won some resounding electoral victories focused on affordability, and there is no easy consensus on the Middle East. Yet this would compound the mistake of ignoring, or rationalizing, an intolerable reality.

In Gaza, Palestinians live amid mountains of rubble, Hamas remains entrenched and international journalists are still routinely denied entry to catalog the destruction. The Israeli Parliament has voted (again) in favor of annexing the West Bank, where brutal attacks by Israeli settlers are escalating. Israeli politics has drifted so far to the right that even the removal of Mr. Netanyahu is unlikely to usher in a moderate government that swiftly changes course.
